README.md, before:

Strata: A Cross Media File System
==================================

Strata is a research prototype file system, presented in SOSP 2017 ([Strata]).

Strata is developed and tested on Ubuntu 16.04 LTS, Linux kernel 4.8.12 and gcc
version 5.4.0.

This repository contains initial source code and tests. Benchmarks will be
released soon. As a research prototype, Strata has several limitations,
described in the [limitations section](#limitations).

To run NVM emulation, your machine should have enough DRAM for testing. Kernel
will reserve the DRAM for NVM emulation. Strata requires at least two
partitions of NVM: operation log (1 - 2 GB) and NVM shared area (It depends on
your test. I recommend to use more than 8 GB at least).

### Building Strata ###
Assume current directory is a project root directory.

##### 1. Change memory configuration
~~~
./utils/change_dev_size.py [dax0.0] [SSD] [HDD] [dax1.0]
~~~
This script does the following:
1. Opens `libfs/src/storage/storage.h`
2. Modifies`dev_size` array values with each storage size (the same as in your
   grub conf, see the [running Strata](#runningstrata) section) in bytes.
    - `dev_size[0]`: could be always 0 (not used)
    - `dev_size[1]`: dax0.0 size
    - `dev_size[2]`: SSD size : just put 0 for now
    - `dev_size[3]`: HDD size : put 0 for now
    - `dev_size[4]`: dax1.0 size

##### 2. Build kernel
~~~
cd kernel/kbuild
make -f Makefile.setup .config
make -f Makefile.setup
make -j
sudo make modules_install ; sudo make install
~~~

This step requires reboot your machine after installing the new kernel.

##### 3. Build dependent libraries (SPDK, NVML, JEMALLOC)
~~~
cd libfs/lib
git clone https://github.com/pmem/nvml
git clone https://github.com/pmem/syscall_intercept.git
make

tar xvjf jemalloc-4.5.0.tar.bz2
cd jemalloc-4.5.0
./autogen
./configure
make
~~~

For SPDK build errors, please check a SPDK website (http://www.spdk.io/doc/getting_started.html)

For NVML build errors, please check a NVML repository (https://github.com/pmem/nvml/)
##### 4. Build Libfs
~~~
cd libfs
make
~~~
##### 5. Build KernelFS
~~~
cd kernfs
make
cd tests
make
~~~

### <a name="runningstrata"></a>Running Strata ###

##### 1. Setup NVM (DEV-DAX) emulation
Strata emulates NVM using a physically contiguous memory region, and relies on
the kernel NVDIMM support.

You need to make sure that your kernel is built with NVDIMM support enabled
(CONFIG_BLK_DEV_PMEM), and then you can reserve the memory space by booting the
kernel with memmap command line option.

For instance, adding memmap=16G!8G to the kernel boot parameters will reserve
16GB memory starting from 8GB address, and the kernel will create a pmem0 block
device under the /dev directory. Adding `GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX="memmap=16G!4G,
4G!20G"` will add a pmem0 and pmem1.

Details are available at:
http://pmem.io/2016/02/22/pm-emulation.html

This step requires rebooting your machine.

##### 2. Use DEV-DAX emulation
~~~
cd utils
sudo ./use_dax.sh bind
~~~
This instruction will change pmem emulation to use dev-dax mode.

e.g., `/dev/pmem0` -> `/dev/dax0`

To rollback to previous setting,
~~~
sudo ./use_dax.sh unbind
~~~

##### 3. Setup storage size
This step requires rebuilding of Libfs and KernFS.
~~~
TODO: Some instructions to setup storage size (by a script or manually)
~~~

##### 4. Setup UIO for SPDK
~~~
cd utils
sudo ./uio_setup.sh linux config
~~~
To rollback to previous setting,
~~~
sudo ./uio_setup.sh linux reset
~~~

##### 5. Formatting storages
~~~
cd libfs
sudo ./bin/mkfs.mlfs <dev id>
~~~
dev id is a device identifier used in Strata (hardcoded).<br/>
1 : NVM shared area <br/>
2 : SSD shared area <br/>
3 : HDD shared area <br/>
4 : Operation log of processes <br/>

If you encounter an error message, "mmap invalid argument",
it means kernel does not allow mmap for NVM emulation.
Usually, incorrect (or unaligned) setting of storage sizes (at step 3) causes
the problem.
Please make sure that your storage size is correct in "libfs/src/storage/storage.h"

##### 6. Run KernelFS
~~~
cd kernfs/tests
make
sudo ./run.sh kernfs
~~~

##### 7. Run testing problem
~~~
cd libfs/tests
make
sudo ./run.sh iotest sw 2G 4K 1 #sequential write, 2GB file with 4K IO and 1 thread
~~~

### Strata configuration ###
##### 1. LibFS configuration ######
In `libfs/Makefile`, search `MLFS_FLAGS` as keyword
~~~~
MLFS_FLAGS = -DLIBFS -DMLFS_INFO
#MLFS_FLAGS += -DCONCURRENT
MLFS_FLAGS += -DINVALIDATION
#MLFS_FLAGS += -DKLIB_HASH
MLFS_FLAGS += -DUSE_SSD
#MLFS_FLAGS += -DUSE_HDD
#MLFS_FLAGS += -DMLFS_LOG
~~~~

`DCONCURRENT` - allow parallelism in libfs <br/>
`DKLIB_HASH` - use klib hashing for log hash table <br/>
`DUSE_SSD`, `DUSE_HDD` - make LibFS to use SSD and HDD <br/>

###### 2. KernelFS configuration ######
~~~
#MLFS_FLAGS = -DKERNFS
MLFS_FLAGS += -DBALLOC
#MLFS_FLAGS += -DDIGEST_OPT
#MLFS_FLAGS += -DIOMERGE
#MLFS_FLAGS += -DCONCURRENT
#MLFS_FLAGS += -DFCONCURRENT
#MLFS_FLAGS += -DUSE_SSD
#MLFS_FLAGS += -DUSE_HDD
#MLFS_FLAGS += -DMIGRATION
#MLFS_FLAGS += -DEXPERIMENTAL
~~~

`DBALLOC` - use new block allocator (use it always) <br/>
`DIGEST_OPT` - use log coalescing <br/>
`DIOMERGE` - use io merging <br/>
`DCONCURRENT` - allow concurrent digest <br/>
`DMIGRATION` - allow data migration. It requires turning on `DUSE_SSD` <br/>

For debugging, DIGEST_OPT, DIOMERGE, DCONCURRENT is disabled for now

### Limitations ###

1. KernelFS is currently implmented in user-level.
2. Leases are not fully implemented.
3. A directory could contain up to 1000 files.
4. mmap is not supported yet.
5. Benchmarks are not fully tested in all configurations. Working
   configurations are described in our paper.
6. There are known bugs in fork.

[Strata]: http://www.cs.utexas.edu/~yjkwon/publication/strata/ "Strata project"

Commit message:

Strata is no longer maintained. Refer to Assise for updates.

README.md, after:

Strata: A Cross Media File System
==================================

> **This repository is no longer maintained; Strata is now under the umbrella of the [Assise project](https://github.com/ut-osa/assise).**

Strata is a research prototype file system, presented in SOSP 2017 ([Strata]).

Strata is developed and tested on Ubuntu 16.04 LTS, Linux kernel 4.8.12 and gcc
version 5.4.0.

This repository contains initial source code and tests. Benchmarks will be
released soon. As a research prototype, Strata has several limitations,
described in the [limitations section](#limitations).

To run NVM emulation, your machine should have enough DRAM for testing. Kernel
will reserve the DRAM for NVM emulation. Strata requires at least two
partitions of NVM: operation log (1 - 2 GB) and NVM shared area (It depends on
your test. I recommend to use more than 8 GB at least).

### Building Strata ###
Assume current directory is a project root directory.

##### 1. Change memory configuration
~~~
./utils/change_dev_size.py [dax0.0] [SSD] [HDD] [dax1.0]
~~~
This script does the following:
1. Opens `libfs/src/storage/storage.h`
2. Modifies`dev_size` array values with each storage size (the same as in your
   grub conf, see the [running Strata](#runningstrata) section) in bytes.
    - `dev_size[0]`: could be always 0 (not used)
    - `dev_size[1]`: dax0.0 size
    - `dev_size[2]`: SSD size : just put 0 for now
    - `dev_size[3]`: HDD size : put 0 for now
    - `dev_size[4]`: dax1.0 size

##### 2. Build kernel
~~~
cd kernel/kbuild
make -f Makefile.setup .config
make -f Makefile.setup
make -j
sudo make modules_install ; sudo make install
~~~

This step requires reboot your machine after installing the new kernel.

##### 3. Build dependent libraries (SPDK, NVML, JEMALLOC)
~~~
cd libfs/lib
git clone https://github.com/pmem/nvml
git clone https://github.com/pmem/syscall_intercept.git
make

tar xvjf jemalloc-4.5.0.tar.bz2
cd jemalloc-4.5.0
./autogen
./configure
make
~~~

For SPDK build errors, please check a SPDK website (http://www.spdk.io/doc/getting_started.html)

For NVML build errors, please check a NVML repository (https://github.com/pmem/nvml/)
##### 4. Build Libfs
~~~
cd libfs
make
~~~
##### 5. Build KernelFS
~~~
cd kernfs
make
cd tests
make
~~~

### <a name="runningstrata"></a>Running Strata ###

##### 1. Setup NVM (DEV-DAX) emulation
Strata emulates NVM using a physically contiguous memory region, and relies on
the kernel NVDIMM support.

You need to make sure that your kernel is built with NVDIMM support enabled
(CONFIG_BLK_DEV_PMEM), and then you can reserve the memory space by booting the
kernel with memmap command line option.

For instance, adding memmap=16G!8G to the kernel boot parameters will reserve
16GB memory starting from 8GB address, and the kernel will create a pmem0 block
device under the /dev directory. Adding `GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX="memmap=16G!4G,
4G!20G"` will add a pmem0 and pmem1.

Details are available at:
http://pmem.io/2016/02/22/pm-emulation.html

This step requires rebooting your machine.

##### 2. Use DEV-DAX emulation
~~~
cd utils
sudo ./use_dax.sh bind
~~~
This instruction will change pmem emulation to use dev-dax mode.

e.g., `/dev/pmem0` -> `/dev/dax0`

To rollback to previous setting,
~~~
sudo ./use_dax.sh unbind
~~~

##### 3. Setup storage size
This step requires rebuilding of Libfs and KernFS.
~~~
TODO: Some instructions to setup storage size (by a script or manually)
~~~

##### 4. Setup UIO for SPDK
~~~
cd utils
sudo ./uio_setup.sh linux config
~~~
To rollback to previous setting,
~~~
sudo ./uio_setup.sh linux reset
~~~

##### 5. Formatting storages
~~~
cd libfs
sudo ./bin/mkfs.mlfs <dev id>
~~~
dev id is a device identifier used in Strata (hardcoded).<br/>
1 : NVM shared area <br/>
2 : SSD shared area <br/>
3 : HDD shared area <br/>
4 : Operation log of processes <br/>

If you encounter an error message, "mmap invalid argument",
it means kernel does not allow mmap for NVM emulation.
Usually, incorrect (or unaligned) setting of storage sizes (at step 3) causes
the problem.
Please make sure that your storage size is correct in "libfs/src/storage/storage.h"

##### 6. Run KernelFS
~~~
cd kernfs/tests
make
sudo ./run.sh kernfs
~~~

##### 7. Run testing problem
~~~
cd libfs/tests
make
sudo ./run.sh iotest sw 2G 4K 1 #sequential write, 2GB file with 4K IO and 1 thread
~~~

### Strata configuration ###
##### 1. LibFS configuration ######
In `libfs/Makefile`, search `MLFS_FLAGS` as keyword
~~~~
MLFS_FLAGS = -DLIBFS -DMLFS_INFO
#MLFS_FLAGS += -DCONCURRENT
MLFS_FLAGS += -DINVALIDATION
#MLFS_FLAGS += -DKLIB_HASH
MLFS_FLAGS += -DUSE_SSD
#MLFS_FLAGS += -DUSE_HDD
#MLFS_FLAGS += -DMLFS_LOG
~~~~

`DCONCURRENT` - allow parallelism in libfs <br/>
`DKLIB_HASH` - use klib hashing for log hash table <br/>
`DUSE_SSD`, `DUSE_HDD` - make LibFS to use SSD and HDD <br/>

###### 2. KernelFS configuration ######
~~~
#MLFS_FLAGS = -DKERNFS
MLFS_FLAGS += -DBALLOC
#MLFS_FLAGS += -DDIGEST_OPT
#MLFS_FLAGS += -DIOMERGE
#MLFS_FLAGS += -DCONCURRENT
#MLFS_FLAGS += -DFCONCURRENT
#MLFS_FLAGS += -DUSE_SSD
#MLFS_FLAGS += -DUSE_HDD
#MLFS_FLAGS += -DMIGRATION
#MLFS_FLAGS += -DEXPERIMENTAL
~~~

`DBALLOC` - use new block allocator (use it always) <br/>
`DIGEST_OPT` - use log coalescing <br/>
`DIOMERGE` - use io merging <br/>
`DCONCURRENT` - allow concurrent digest <br/>
`DMIGRATION` - allow data migration. It requires turning on `DUSE_SSD` <br/>

For debugging, DIGEST_OPT, DIOMERGE, DCONCURRENT is disabled for now

### Limitations ###

1. KernelFS is currently implmented in user-level.
2. Leases are not fully implemented.
3. A directory could contain up to 1000 files.
4. mmap is not supported yet.
5. Benchmarks are not fully tested in all configurations. Working
   configurations are described in our paper.
6. There are known bugs in fork.

[Strata]: http://www.cs.utexas.edu/~yjkwon/publication/strata/ "Strata project"
